---
layout: post
title: "The Things That Keep Me Up At Night"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt:
tags: [math, cohomology, sheaf]
date: 2018-08-25
---

Every now and then, I will find some theorem or exercise that is interesting and "obviously" doable, but despite my best efforts, I just can't seem to figure out what is going on. Sometimes when this happens, I find myself unable to let go of this problem, and it enters my mathematical backlog, where it will continue to torment me until the day I die[^1]. When I have free headspace, I like to return to these problems in hopes of finally having the insight I need; this post will be my attempt [^2] to resolve one of the things that more recently kept me up at night. In particular, we will show that[^4]

$$\hom^1(\R,A_{\R})=0$$

where $A$ is an abelian group and $A_{\R}$ is its associated constant sheaf on $\R$. A lot [^6] of me figuring out the details of showing this will be done as I write this post, so what follows while likely be rough and ill-organized.

# What Could Have Been
In the end, this post turned out very differently from what I originally imagined. The original game plan was, roughly, introduce the sheaf inverse image and show that given a (continuous) function $f:X\to Y$ and a sheaf $\ms F$ on $Y$, one gets maps on cohomology

$$\hom^k(Y,\ms F)\to\hom^k(X,\inv f\ms F)$$

After this, remark that the inverse image of a constant sheaf is a constant sheaf (!), so sheaf cohomology with constant coefficients is a (contravariant) functor. Finally, I would show that any two homotopic maps $f\simeq g:X\to Y$ induced the same map on cohomology

$$\ast f=\ast g:\hom^k(Y, A_Y)\to\hom^k(X, A_X)$$

where $A$ is an abelian group and $A_Y$ is its associated constant sheaf on $Y$. This would mean that homotopy equivalent spaces have the same (sheaf) cohomology (with constant coefficients). Since $\R$ is contractible and any sheaf on a one-point space is flasque, this would prove that $\hom^1(\R,A_{\R})=0$. 

However, while trying to figure out how to actually do all of that, I stumbled across this [stackexchange question](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2801221/why-does-the-sheaf-cohomology-of-the-constant-sheaf-on-mathbbr-vanish), which presents a much better [^3] proof of this fact. Hence, I will instead follow the lead of that question. [^5]

I never did finish working out the details of my original plan, so it's possible I return to it in the future. While I do not think it is the best method to achieve the aim of this post, I do think it would be nice to write up the details of why cohomology with constant coefficients is invariant under homotopy.

# The Proof

One of the big things about cohomology is that short exact sequences (of sheaves) give rise to long exact sequences in cohomology. Because of that, the claim that $\hom^1(\R, A_{\R})=0$ is equivalent to the following.

<div class="theorem">
	Let $0\to A_{\R}\xrightarrow f\ms B\xrightarrow g\ms C\to0$ be a short exact sequence of sheaves (of abelian groups) on $\R$. Then, $0\to A\to\ms B(\R)\to\ms C(\R)\to0$ is exact. In particular, $\ms B(\R)\to\ms C(\R)$ is surjective.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
	Fix any $\gamma\in\ms C(\R)$, and let
	$$\mc S=\brackets{\left.(U,\beta)\right|g_U(\beta)=\gamma\mid_U\text{ and }U\text{ is an open interval}}\text{ where }(U,\beta)\le(U',\beta')\iff U\subseteq U'\text{ and }\beta'\mid_U=\beta$$
	Now, consider some chain $(U_1,\beta_1)\le(U_2,\beta_2)\le\dots$ in $\mc S$. Let $U=\bigcup_nU_n$ and let $\beta="\lim\beta_n"$. By $\lim\beta_n$ what I really mean is that $\{U_n\}$ gives an open cover of $U$ and because $\ms B$ is a sheaf, the various $\beta_n\in U_n$ patch together to form a unique element $\beta="\lim\beta_n"$ of $U$. Note that $U$ is an open interval and that $g_U(\beta)=\gamma\mid_U$ essentially because $\ms C$ is a sheaf. Thus, every chain in $\mc S$ has an upper bound, so Zorn's lemma implies that $\mc S$ has a maximal element $(V,\delta)$. We claim that $V=\R$, so $\delta\in\ms B(\R)$ is a preimage of $\gamma$. Suppose otherwise. By exactness at $\ms C$, there exists an open cover $\{U_n\}$ of $\R$ with elements $\beta_n\in U_n$ s.t. $g_{U_n}(\beta_n)=\gamma\mid_{U_n}$ for all $n$. By decomposing each $U_n$ into its connected components, and replacing the corresponding $\beta_n$ with its restrictions onto those components, we may assume that each $U_n$ is an open interval. Now, since $V\neq\R$, there must exist some $U_m$ s.t. $U_m\not\subset V$ and $U_m\cap V\neq\emptyset$. Let $V_m=U_m\cap V$, and note that
	$$\delta\mid_{V_m}-\beta_m\mid_{V_m}\in\ker g=\im f$$
	so there's some $\alpha_m\in A_{\R}(V_m)$ s.t. $f_{V_m}(\alpha_m)=\delta_{V_m}-\beta_m\mid_{V_m}$. Note that $V_m$ is an open interval, so $A_{\R}(V_m)=A=A_{\R}(\R)$ and the restriction map $A_{\R}(\R)\to A_{\R}(V_m)$ is the identity. Hence, $\alpha_m$ extends to a global section $\alpha\in A_{\R}(\R)$. Finally, $f_{U_m}(\alpha\mid_{U_m})+\beta_m\in\ms B(U_m)$ and $\delta\in\ms B(V)$ agree on $V_m$, so they patch together to form a (unique) $\beta\in\ms B(U_m\cup V)$. However, 
	$$g_{U_m\cup V}(\beta)\mid_{U_m}=g_{U_m}(\beta_m-f_{U_m}(\alpha\mid_{U_m}))=\gamma\mid_{U_m}$$
	and
	$$g_{U_m\cup V}(\beta)\mid_V=g_V(\delta)=\gamma\mid_V$$
	so $g_{U_m\cup V}(\beta)=\gamma_{U_m\cup V}$. However, because $U_m\cup V\supsetneq V$, this contradicts $(V,\delta)$ being a maximal element. Thus, we must have had $V=\R$ all along, proving the theorem.
</div>
<div class="cor">
	$\hom^1(\R,A_{\R})=0$
</div>
<div class="proof4">
	Just embed $A_{\R}$ in any acyclic sheaf. i.e. consider any short exact sequence
	$$0\to A_{\R}\to\ms B\to\ms C\to0$$
	where $\ms B$ is acyclic. Then, looking at the long exact sequence on cohomology, we see
	$$0\to\hom^0(\R, A_{\R})\to\hom^0(\R, \ms B)\to\hom^0(\R, \ms C)\to\hom^1(\R, A_{\R})\to0$$
	but $\im(\hom^0(\R,\ms B)\to\hom^0(\R, \ms C))=\hom^0(\R, \ms C)$ by the above theorem. By exactness, this means that $\ker(\hom^1(\R, A_{\R})\to0)=0$ so $\hom^1(\R, A_{\R})=0$.
</div>

# A Second Question
In the previous section we showed that all constant sheaves on $\R$ are acyclic [^10]. One can similarly show that, for any fixed $k\ge0$, the sheaf $C^k_{\R,\R}$ of $k$-differentiable functions (where 0-differentiable=continuous) into $\R$ is acyclic. In fact, when you think about, sheaf cohomology to vaguely about measuring the failure of certain local-to-global problems on your space, but $\R$ looks very similarly locally and globally. In fact, given any point in $\R$, you can find arbitrarily small neighborhoods of that point that are homeomorphic to the whole space [^7]. Thinking about this made me wonder the following:

<div class="question">
	Are there any non-acyclic (cyclic?) sheaves (of abelian groups) on $\R$?
</div>

I brought this question up to one of my friends, and after talking about it for a while, we found an example [^8] which shows the answer is yes. Quick note: for arbitrary $S\subset X$ and a sheaf $\ms F$ on $X$, we set

$$\ms F(S)=\dirlim_{U\supseteq S}\ms F(U)$$

where the directed limit is taken over open sets $U\supseteq S$. Hence, elements of $\ms F(S)$ are "germs over $S$."

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}
<div class="example">
Fix any two distinct points $a,b\in\R$, and let $U=\R\sm\brackets{a,b}$. Let $\Z_U$ be the sheaf on $\R$ given by the sheafification of[^9]

$$\ms F(V)=\twocases{\Z_U(U\cap V)}{V\cap U\neq\emptyset}0$$

where the $\Z_U$ in the definition above is the constant sheaf on $U$ and not the sheaf on $\R$ we are constructing. Let $\Z_{\\{a,b\\}}$ be a similarly defined sheaf on $\R$ with $\{a,b\}$ in place of $U$. Then, we get a short exact sequence

$$0\to\Z_U\to\Z_{\R}\to\Z_{\{a,b\}}\to0$$

where exactness can easily be checked on stalks: for stalks over $x\not\in\\{a,b\\}$ the sequence becomes $0\to\Z\to\Z\to0\to0$ which is exact, and for stalks over $x\in\\{a,b\\}$ it becomes $0\to0\to\Z\to\Z\to0$ which is also exact. Looking at cohomology, we get that the following is exact

$$\hom^0(\R,\Z_{\R})\to\hom^0(\R,\Z_{\{a,b\}})\to\hom^1(\R,\Z_U)\text{ which is }\Z\to\Z\oplus\Z\to\hom^1(\R,\Z_U)$$

This means that $\hom^1(\R,\Z_U)\neq0$ as there's no surjection $\Z\to\Z\oplus\Z$. Thus, $\Z_U$ is a non-acyclic sheaf on $\R$.
</div>

[^1]: or I figure it out; whichever happens first.
[^2]: if you are reading this, then I probably succeeded.
[^3]: better in terms of simplicity. As a consequence though, it involves less general concepts/theorems.
[^4]: Moreso than usual, this post is primarly meant for me, so many things won't be defined as I assume I will still know them whenever I look back on this post in the future.
[^5]: I'll basically just fill in the details of the first bullet point of the answer given in the link
[^6]: Most (I've really only thought about big picture stuff)
[^7]: This is kind of the idea behind interval-flasque sheaves on R
[^8]: in Hartshorne
[^9]: I must admit that it is possible I am defining things incorrectly here. If you notice a mistake, call me out on it.
[^10]: This isn't quite true, but it is not hard to show this after what was done in the previous section.
