---
layout: post
title: "\"Fourier Analysis\""
modified: 2019-01-31
categories: blog
excerpt:
tags: [math, fourier analysis]
date: 2019-01-13 00:01:00
---

I may start writing posts much more frequently than usual. There is a lot of mathematics that I want to learn this quarter, and somehow it seems that writing these posts is one of the best ways I know to help me absorb everything [^1]. In this post, I want to do a quick introduction to fourier analysis on the circle $S^1$ and on the real line $\R$. Because of my (lack of a) background in analysis, I may be a little handwavy every now and then [^3], but the main ideas will be there. In addition, as I'm ~~stealing this material from Stein~~ typing this all up, I might try to include some footnotes with questions/comments I have about how the ideas here generalize or relate to other parts of mathematics. Finally, this post will lead into [another one on the Riemann zeta function](../riemann-dirichlet) [^2], so look forward to that.

# Fourier Aanalysis on $S^1$

Our goal is to be able to say that we can represent a function $f:S^1\to\C$ (which we view as a $1$-periodic function $f:\R\to\C$ [^4]) as a fourier series

$$f(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty a_ne^{2\pi in}$$

with coefficients given by

$$a_n=\int_0^1f(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx.$$

Now, there are some really ugly function $f:S^1\to\C$, so we obviously can't expect this to hold for all of them. Hence, we will impose the restriction that all our functions are Riemann integrable when considered as functions $[0,1]\to\C$ (i.e. their real and imaginary parts of both Riemann integrable in the following sense).

<div class="definition">
    We say a function $f:[0,1]\to\R$ is <b>Riemann integrable</b> if it is bounded and for every $\eps>0$, there exists a subdivision $P=\bracks{0=x_0< x_1<\cdots< x_n=L}$ of $[0,1]$ so that $\mc U(f, P)-\mc L(f, P)<\eps$ where
    $$\mc U(f, P)=\sum_{i=1}^n\sqbracks{\sup_{x\in[x_{i-1},x_i]}f(x)}\parens{x_i-x_{i-1}}\text{ and }\mc L(f, P)=\sum_{i=1}^n\sqbracks{\inf_{x\in[x_{i-1},x_i]}f(x)}\parens{x_i-x_{i-1}}$$
    are the upper and lower, respectively, sums of $f$ for this subdivision. Whenever $f$ is Riemann integrable, the <b>Riemann integral</b> of $f$ is
    $$\int_0^1f(x)\dx:=\inf_P\mc U(f,P)=\sup_P\mc L(f,P)$$
</div>
<div class="remark">
    All continuous functions $[0,1]\to\C$ are Riemann integrable, but a Riemann integrable function does not have to be continuous; however, if $f$ is Riemann integrable, then its set of discontinuities has measure $0$.
</div>

Denote the $\C$-algebra [^5] of Riemann integrable (complex-valued) functions on $S^1$ by $\mc R(S^1)$. Given some $f\in\mc R(S^1)$, its <b>$n$th Fourier coefficient</b> is [^8]

$$\hat f(n)=a(f)_ n:=\int_0^1f(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx=\int_0^1f(x)\cos(2\pi nx)\dx+i\int_0^1f(x)\sin(2\pi nx).$$

If we feel so inclined, we can view this construction as a function [^6]

$$\mapdesc{\wh{}}{\mc R(S^1)}{\C^{\Z}}{f}{\hat f},$$

where $\C^{\Z}$ is the space of all functions $\Z\to\C$. It's worth noting that while we can define Fourier coefficients for all Riemann integrable functions, it is not the case that the associated fourier series converges to $f$ always. This is immediate once you remember that you can change a function at a single point [^7] without changing its integral, so to obtain a nice theory, we'll need to be more restrictive. To help us decide how restrictive, here's a nice theorem.

<div class="theorem">
    Suppose that $f:S^1\to\C$ (i.e. $f:[0,1]\to\C$ where $f(0)=f(1)$) is Riemann integrable with $a(f)_n=0$ for all $n\in\Z$. Then, $f(x_0)=0$ if $f$ is continuous at $x_0$.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    We prove this in the case that $f$ is real-valued. By shifting $f$ and negating if necessary, we may assume that $x_0=\frac12$ and $f(x_0)>0$. Since $f$ is continuous at $x_0$, we can choose $0<\delta\le\frac12$ so that $\abs{f(x)-f(x_0)}< f(x_0)/2\implies f(x)>f(x_0)/2$ whenever $\abs{x-\frac12}<\delta$. Let<br>
    $$p(x)=\eps+\cos\parens{2\pi x-\pi}$$
    where $\eps>0$ is small enough that $\abs{p(x)}< 1-\eps/2$ whenever $\delta\le\abs{x-\frac12}\le\frac12$ (e.g. $\eps<\frac23\parens{1-\cos(2\pi\delta)}$). Next, fix a positive $\eta<\delta$ s.t. $p(x)\ge1+\eps/2$ for $\abs{x-\frac12}<\eta$ (exists by continuity since $p(1/2)=1+\eps>1+\eps/2$, and let $p_k(x)=p(x)^k$. Finally, fix $B$ so that $\abs{f(x)}\le B$ for all $x$. Each $p_k$ is a trigonometric polynomial, so $\hat f(n)=0$ for all $n$ implies that<br>
    $$\int_0^1f(x)p_k(x)\dx=0\text{ for all $k$}.$$
    At the same time, our various chosen parameters give us the following integral estimates
    $$\begin{align*}
        \abs{\int_{\delta\le\abs{x-\frac12}}f(x)p_k(x)\dx} &\le B(1-\eps/2)^k\\
        \int_{\eta\le\abs{x-\frac12}<\delta}f(x)p_k(x)\dx &\ge0\\
        \int_{\abs{x-\frac12}<\eta}f(x)p_k(x)\dx &\ge \eta f(x_0)\parens{1+\eps/2}^k
    \end{align*}.$$
    As $k\to\infty$, the top integral approaches $0$, the middle one remains non-negative, and the bottom one appraoches $\infty$. Summing them, we get
    $$\int_0^1f(x)p_k(x)\dx\to\infty\text{ as }k\to\infty$$
    which is a contradiction. When $f$ is not real-valued, let $u(x)=\Re f(x)$ and $v(x)=\Im f(x)$. Then,
    $$u(x)=\frac{f(x)+\conj f(x)}2\text{ and }v(x)=\frac{f(x)-\conj f(x)}{2i}.$$
    Furthermore, $a(\conj f)_n=\conj{a(f)_{-n}}$. Taken together, this means $a(u)_n=\frac12\parens{a(f)_n+\conj{a(f)_{-n}}}=0$ (and similarly, $a(v)_n=0$), so $f$ vanishes.
</div>
<div class="corollary">
    If $f$ is continuous on the circle and $\hat f(n)=0$ for all $n\in\Z$, then $f=0$.
</div>
<div class="corollary">
    Suppose that $f$ is a continuous function on the circle whose <b>Fourier series</b>
    $$\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty\hat f(n)e^{2\pi inx}$$
    is absolutely convergent with the further condition that $\sum_{n\in\Z}\abs{\hat f(n)}<\infty$. Then, the Fourier series converges uniformly to $f$, i.e.
    $$\lim_{N\to\infty}\sum_{n=-N}^N\hat f(n)e^{2\pi inx}=f(x)\text{ uniformly in }x$$
</div>
The proof idea here is that the condition on the coefficients guarantees that the Fourier series converges (absolutely and uniformly) to some continuous function $g(x)$ with the same coefficients as $f$; hence, $f(x)=g(x)$ by the first corollary.

<div class="definition">
    Given two functions $f,g$, we say $f(x)=O(g(x))$, read "$f(x)$ is big-O of $g(x)$," as $x\to a$ if there exists some constant $C$ such that $\abs{f(x)}\le C\abs{g(x)}$ in some neighborhood of $a$. In particular, if $f(x)=O(g(x))$ as $x\to\infty$, then there are constants $C,n$ such that $\abs{f(x)}\le C\abs{g(x)}$ for all $x\ge n$.
</div>
<div class="proposition">
    If $f\in C^k(S^1)$ (i.e. $f$ is $k$-times-differentiable with continuous $k$th derivative), then $\hat f(n)=O(1/\abs n^k)$ as $\abs n\to\infty$.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Just use integration by parts. For $n\neq0$, we have
    $$\begin{align*}
        \hat f(n)=\int_0^1f(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx
        &=\sqbracks{\frac{-f(x)}{2\pi i n}}_0^1+\frac1{2\pi i n}\int_0^1f'(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx\\
        &=\frac1{2\pi i n}\int_0^1f'(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx\\
        &=\cdots\\
        &=\frac1{(2\pi in)^k}\int_0^1f^{(k)}(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx
    \end{align*}$$
    where the bracket quantites vanish since $f^{(n)}(0)=f^{(n)}(1)$ for all $n$. Fixing $B\in\R_{>0}$ such that $\abs{f^{(k)}(x)}\le B$ for all $x$, this means that
    $$\abs{\hat f(n)}\le\frac B{(2\pi\abs n)^k}=O(\abs n^{-k})$$
</div>
<div class="corollary">
    If $f\in C^k(S^1)$ for $k\ge2$, then the Fourier series of $f$ converges absolutely and uniformly to $f$.
</div>

There's more that can be said here, but my main goal is to get to Poisson summation, and I think we've developed all the theory on $S^1$ that we need for that, so let's move on$\dots$ after a few remarks.

The first thing we'll do is update our description of $\wh{}$ as a map on function spaces. Letting $\mc S(\Z)$ denote the space of functions $f:\Z\to\C$ such that $\sum_{n\in\Z}f(n)<\infty$, we can view our work here as showing that the function

$$\mapdesc{\wh{}}{C^2(S^1)}{\mc S(\Z)}{f}{\wh f}$$

is injective. 

The second thing we'll do is give a little intuition for the formula for Fourier coefficients, i.e. why take

$$a_n=\int_0^1f(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx?$$

The idea is that the functions $g_n(x)=e^{2\pi inx}$ as $n$ varies over $\Z$ are pairwise orthogonal (and have norm $1$) with respect to the following inner product on $\mc R(S^1)$:

$$\angled fg=\int_0^1f(x)\conj{g(x)}\dx.$$

This means that if we can represent some function $f\in\mc R(S^1)$ as $f(x)=\sum_{d\in\Z}c_de^{2\pi idx}$, then we must have

$$\int_0^1f(x)e^{-2\pi inx}\dx=\angled f{g_n}=\angled{\sum_{d\in\Z}c_dg_d}{g_n}=\sum_{d\in\Z}c_d\angled{g_d}{g_n}=c_n\angled{g_n}{g_n}=c_n.$$

# Fourier Analysis on $\R$

This time around, we'll start off with a nice space of functions.
<div class="definition">
    The <b>Schwartz space</b> on $\R$ is the set of all smooth (i.e. infinitely differentiable) functions on $f$ that are rapidly decreasing in the sense that
    $$\sup_{x\in\R}\abs x^k\abs{f^{(\l)}(x)}<\infty\text{ for every }k,\l\ge0.$$
    We denote this space by $\mc S(\R)$. Note that it is a $\C$-vector space.
</div>
<div class="remark">
    It's clear from the definition that $f(x)\in\mc S(\R)\implies f'(x)\in\mc\S(\R)$ and $xf(x)\in\mc S(\R)$. Hence, $\mc S(\R)$ is closed under differentiation and polynomial multiplication. Put another way, $\C[x]$-module that is closed under differentiation. Put another way, $\mc S(\R)$ is a $\C[x,D]$-module where $D$ acts via the differentiation operator.
</div>
<div class="example">
    $f(x)=e^{-x^2}\in\mc S(\R)$. This is because $P(x)e^{-x^2}\to0$ as $\abs x\to\infty$ for any polynomial $P$ (in particular, for $P(x)=x^k$), and an easy induction argument shows that every derivative of $f$ is of the form $P(x)e^{-x^2}$. In fact, $f_a(x)=e^{-ax^2}\in\mc S(\R)$ for every $a>0$.
</div>

One (though certainly not the only) nice property of Schwartz functions is that they decay fast enough to have a finite integral over all of $\R$. That is, if $f\in\mc S(\R)$, then

$$\lim_{N\to\infty}\int_{-N}^Nf(x)\dx$$

exists and is finite. To see this, let $I_N=\int_{-N}^Nf(x)\dx$, so we only need to show that $I_N$ is Cauchy.

<div class="lemma">
    If $f\in\mc S(\R)$, then there exists some $N>0$ s.t. $x\ge N\implies\abs{f(x)}\le1/x^2$.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Suppose not, so there exists arbitrarirly large $x\in\R$ with $\abs{f(x)}>1/x^2$. This means we can find some sequences $\{a_n\}$ of real numbers such that $\lim\abs{a_n}=\infty$ and $\abs{a_n}^3\abs{f(a_n)}>\abs{a_n}$ for all $n$. However, this contradicts
    $$\sup_{x\in\R}\abs x^3\abs{f(x)}<\infty,$$
    so we win.
</div>

Given that lemma, fix $N$ large enough that $x\ge N\implies\abs{f(x)}\le1/x^2$, and note that for $m>n\ge N$ we have

$$\abs{I_m-I_n}=\abs{\int_{n\le\abs x\le m}f(x)\dx}\le{\int_{n\le\abs x\le m}x^{-2}\dx}\le\sqbracks{-\frac1x}_{-m}^{-n}+\sqbracks{-\frac1x}_n^m=2\parens{\frac1n-\frac1m}\le\frac2N\to0$$

so $\{I_n\}$ is indeed Caucy, and we can safely define

$$\int_{\R}f(x)\dx=\int_{-\infty}^\infty f(x)\dx=\lim_{N\to\infty}\int_{-N}^Nf(x)\dx.$$

<div class="definition">
    The <b>Fourier transform</b> of a function $f\in\mc S(\R)$ is defined by
    $$\hat f(\xi)=\int_{-\infty}^\infty f(x)e^{-2\pi ix\xi}\dx.$$
    We will sometimes denote this by $\mc F(f)(\xi)=\hat f(\xi)$.
</div>
<div class="proposition">
    The Fourier transform enjoys the following list of properties.
    <ol>
        <li> $\mc F(f(x+h))(\xi)=\hat f(\xi)e^{2\pi ih\xi}$ when $h\in\R$. </li>
        <li> $\mc F(f(x)e^{-2\pi ixh})(\xi)=\hat f(\xi+h)$ when $h\in\R$. </li>
        <li> $\mc F(f(\delta x))(\xi)=\inv\delta\hat f(\inv\delta\xi)$ when $\delta>0$. </li>
        <li> $\mc F(f')(\xi) = 2\pi i\xi\hat f(\xi)$. </li>
        <li> $\mc F(-2\pi ixf(x))(\xi) = \frac{\d}{\d\xi}\hat f(\xi)$. </li>
    </ol>
    So the Fourier transform (roughly) turns differentiation into mulitplication by $x$, and shifting into multiplication by $e^{hx}$.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Exercise.
</div>
<div class="corollary">
    If $f\in\mc S(\R)$, then $\hat f\in\mc S(\R)$.
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Note that $\abs{\hat f(\xi)}\le\int_{\R}\abs{f(x)}\dx<\infty$, so the $f\in\mc S(\R)\implies\hat f$ is bounded. Now, for any $\l,k\in\Z_{\ge0}$, we have that
    $$\xi^k\parens{\frac{\d}{\d\xi}}^\l\hat f(\xi)$$
    is bounded since it is the Fourier transform of
    $$\frac1{(2\pi i)^k}\parens{\frac{\d}{\dx}}^k\sqbracks{(-2\pi ix)^\l f(x)}.$$
</div>
This post is more about ideas than details, so let's just state the good stuff.
<div class="theorem" name="Fourier Inversion Formula">
    If $f\in\mc S(\R)$, then
    $$f(x)=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\hat f(\xi)e^{2\pi ix\xi}\d\xi.$$
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Omitted. See the book by Stein and Shakarchi.
</div>

Note that, like last time, we can view our work here as showing some function is "nice." In this instance, we have that

$$\mapdesc{\mc F}{\mc S(\R)}{\mc S(\R)}{f}{\mc F(f)}$$

is a $\C$-vector space isomorphism.

# Poisson Summation
To end things, we'll relate fourier tranforms and fourier series in a neat way. Fix some function $f\in\mc S(\R)$ on the real line, and imagine you want to convert this into some function on the circle. One thing you could try is defining

$$F_1(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty f(x+n),$$

which is obviously $1$-periodic (the series converges since $f$ decays rapidly). Alternatively, inspired by Fourier Inversion

$$f(x)=\int_{\R}\hat f(\xi)e^{2\pi ix\xi}\d\xi,$$

you could try creating a periodic version of $f$ by considering some discrete analouge of Fourier inversion:

$$F_2(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^{\infty}\wh f(n)e^{2\pi inx}.$$

As it turns out, these two approaches are equivalent.
<div class="theorem" name="Poisson summation formula">
    If $f\in\mc S(\R)$, then
    $$\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty f(x+n)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty \hat f(n)e^{2\pi inx}.$$
    In particular, setting $x=0$ gives
    $$\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty f(n)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty\hat f(n).$$
</div>
<div class="proof4">
    Since both sides are continuous, it suffices to show they have the same Fourier coefficients. Unsurprisingly, the $m$th Fourier coefiicient of the RHS is $\hat f(m)$. On the LHS, we have
    $$\begin{align*}
        \int_0^1\parens{\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty f(x+n)}e^{-2\pi imx}\dx
        &=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty\int_0^1f(x+n)e^{-2\pi imx}\dx\\
        &=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty\int_n^{n+1}f(x)e^{-2\pi imx}\dx\\
        &=\int_{-\infty}^\infty f(x)e^{-2\pi imx}\dx\\
        &=\hat f(m)
    \end{align*}$$
    where we were allowed to change the sum and the integral because $f$ is rapidly decreasing.
</div>

As an application of this, consider the <b>theta function</b>

$$\vartheta(s)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty e^{-\pi n^2s}$$

defined for $s>0$ (or for $s\in\C$ with $\Re(s)>0$ if you're feeling adventurous). Because the function $f(x)=e^{-\pi sx^2}$ is in $\mc S(\R)$ (e.g. $s>0$), and because $\hat f(\xi)=s^{-1/2}e^{-\pi\xi^2/s}$, we can apply Poisson summation to get

$$\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty e^{-\pi sn^2} = s^{-1/2}\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty e^{-\pi n^2/s}.$$

Written in terms of $\vartheta$, this says that $\vartheta(s)=s^{-1/2}\vartheta(1/s)$. This will be useful when looking at the Riemann zeta function.

[^1]: Of course, when things really get going and I'm regularly doing psets and whatnot, blogging may seem less necessary (and logistically possible) than right now
[^2]: And hopefully writing this post and the next will provide me with decent motivation/context for studying Tate's thesis where he uses fourier analysis on some number-theoretic groups to prove results about their attached zeta functions and whatnot
[^3]: If you're reading this post, it's probably better to think of it as motivation for learning about fourier analysis instead of as an introduction to fourier analysis
[^4]: This is justified because the circle S^1 is just R/Z as a (topological) group, or because S^1 is obtained from [0,1] by joining the endpoints. Use whichever justification you prefer; they're not that different.
[^5]: I think this is furthermore a Banach algebra with inner product (f,g) = \int_0^1(f\bar g)dx but I haven't checked this
[^6]: Secretly the circle S^1 and the integers Z are somehow dual in a way that can be made precise if study Fourier analysis sufficiently generally
[^7]: or any set of measure 0
[^8]: f is complex-valued, so the following is not a decomposition of \hat f(n) into a real and imaginary part